# Brain_Tumor-Classification
One of the most difficult tasks in medical image analysis is tumor segmentation, the most prominent research in the field of medical image analysis focuses on brain tumors. Detection of a Brain Tumor at an early stage can help in increasing the life span of the patient. The manual analysis of large number of MRI scanned images become tedious and involves human errors thereby it is important to introduce a cognitive analysis of the images for faster and robust results. In this project, we propose a brain tumor classification method for Magnetic Resonance Images scans. We are detecting tumor by using preprocessing, segmentation, feature extraction, optimization and lastly classification after that preprocessed image use to classify the tumors. The Convolution Neural Network learns on the MRI scanned images through their features and successfully classifies it into four distinct categories. The concept of Transfer Learning with a Visual Geometry Group (VGG 16) model is also implemented on the images for further analysis. 

A Brain tumour is considered as one of the aggressive diseases, among children and adults. Brain tumours account for 85 to 90 percent of all primary Central Nervous System (CNS) tumours. Every year, around 11,700 people are diagnosed with a brain tumour. The 5-year survival rate for people with a cancerous brain or CNS tumour is approximately 34 percent for men and 36 percent for women. Brain Tumours are classified as: Glioma Tumour, Meningioma Tumour, Pituitary Tumour, Benign Tumour, etc. 
1.	Glioma – Glioma is a type of tumor that occurs in the brain and spinal cord. Gliomas begin in the gluey supportive cells (glial cells) that surround nerve cells and help them function.[4]

2.	Meningioma – A Meningioma is a tumor that arises from the meninges (The membrane), that surround the brain and spinal cord. Although it is not technically a brain tumor, but it is included in this category because it may compress or squeeze the adjacent brain, nerves, and vessels. Meningioma is the most common type of tumor that forms in the head.[5]

3.	No tumor – This class denotes the patients have no Tumor.

4.	Pituitary – Pituitary tumors are abnormal growths that develop in your pituitary gland. Some pituitary tumors result in too much of the hormones that regulate important functions of your body. Some pituitary tumors can cause your pituitary gland to produce lower levels of hormones
Proper treatment, planning, and accurate diagnostics should be implemented to improve the life expectancy of the patients. The best technique to detect brain tumours is Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). A huge amount of image data is generated through the scans. These images are examined by the radiologist. A manual examination can be error-prone due to the level of complexities involved in brain tumours and their properties. 
In this problem statement, we are trying to propose a system for detecting brain tumours by using Deep Learning Algorithms like Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Transfer Learning. Application of automated classification techniques using Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) has consistently shown higher accuracy with faster results than manual classification. 

Brain Tumours are complex. There are a lot of abnormalities in the sizes and location of the brain tumour(s). This makes it difficult for complete understanding of the nature of the tumour. Also, a professional Neurosurgeon is required for MRI analysis. More often in developing countries the lack of skilful doctors and lack of knowledge about tumours makes it challenging and time-consuming to generate reports from MRI. Thus, an automated system can solve this problem and would be of great help to the doctors all around the world.


To solve this problem statement, the initial step was to collect the dataset from Kaggle and then to understand the nature of the data statistically. In the following steps, the data is explored and checked for the consistency of data in each category. The data is found balanced and therefore it goes to the next step of refinement where the size of the images is set at a certain value as required by the model to classify. After data exploration, the data is split into training and validation set while preparing it for model training. The normalization of data is performed to scale the images at a standard uniform image size so that it is easier for the CNN model to learn on the image features. A sequential model is designed with combinations of convoluted layers and max pooling layers to represent the CNN topology. To compile the model, the ‘Adam’ optimizer is used where the loss is specified as ‘categorical_crossentropy’ and the ‘accuracy’ as the performance metric of the model. The model is now fitted for training followed by prediction on test data and generation of the classification report to evaluate the model performance. To improvise the model performance, it goes through two stages of tuning where the strategies followed were hyperparameter tuning like epoch, learning rate, batch size and number of filters, strides, kernel size, padding, number of Dense layers, model topology modification and data augmentation. Based on the observations, it is inferred that the tuned model performed better than the base model. To acquire higher accuracy, we performed transfer learning on the same data with VGG-16 model. This deep convolution network performed best compared to all the model’s performance and has advantage of faster training as this model have pre-trained parameters.
In the next section, a detailed study on the background of the models used like Convolution Neural Network (CNN) and VGG-16. The fourth section consists of methodology which describes the approach used to perform the brain tumour classification. In the fifth section, the performance of the experiments is evaluated and the results are displayed and analysed. At the last, the project is concluded with the key observations from the result analysis aligned to the problem statement. All the relevant references are attached at the reference section at the end of the project report.
